
# Command Language for Awelon (claw)

Awelon project and Wikilon would benefit from effective command line interfaces, e.g. as a REPL and shell. In context of Wikilon, providing console-like services through HTML forms or JavaScript should not be difficult. The underlying [Awelon Object (AO)](AboutAO.md) code is unsuitable for this application in its raw form. 

But we can certainly create a language better suited, which we can rapidly compile into bytecode, with easy access to dependencies on words in a dictionary. Useful features might include:

* write words easily: just use the word, `swap inc mul`
* inline text and number literals: `42 "foo"`
* easy and unambiguous access to bytecode, e.g. `\vrwlc` 
* first class blocks, higher order ops: `1 [2 *] 53 repeat`
* stable target environment for the code

One option is a straightforward expansion into bytecode, e.g. similar to the [original definition of Awelon Object](https://github.com/dmbarbour/awelon/blob/master/AboutAO.md). The original AO was weak for staged programming, visual DSLs, or structured programming, and wasn't strongly an '[object code](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_code)', but it was well suited for command line interfaces. The result was a very Forth-like language. Though, in retrospect, I favor `\` as an escape for bytecode rather than `%`. We might also use `\{token}` for escaped tokens, and `\"text...~` for escaped multi-line texts, since both of those are rare and it simplifies the recognizer.

I propose to call the language **claw**. Command Language (or Line) for AWelon.

## Claw Code

General points to help guide the design:

* need effective support for rational and decimal numbers
* enable flexible extension of programming environments
* transparent, simple, predictable, direct AO translation
* easy to preserve claw sesssions into an AO dictionary 
* round tripping, ability to recover claw code from AO
* implicitly bound to AO dictionary for definitions and data
* concatenative, streamable, composable, purely functional

### Rationals, Decimals, and Extensible Literals

I want support for ratios and decimals (e.g. `2/3` and `3.141`) so I can at least use claw as a simple calculator. Scientific E notation would also be useful in some cases, e.g. working with physical equations. As of 2015 June, Awelon Bytecode no longer directly supports rational numbers, so I shall need to model numbers more explicitly. A simple, promising option is to treat each as a sugar:

        2/3     desugars to     2 3 ratio
        3.141   desugars to     3141 3 decimal
        6.02e23 desugars to     6.02 23 exp10

For round-tripping, the form shall be preserved, e.g. we don't lose the zeroes in `1.000`, and `4/6` would be distinct from `2/3` (before processing by `ratio`). Expansions may involve multiple steps. For example, the `6.02` for the scientific E notation expands as a decimal number. We may generalize this idea for integral and literal values:

        42      desugars to     \#42 integer
        "foo"   desugars to     \"foo
                                ~ literal

Round tripping then uses a simple parser to recognize structure within bytecode. Round-tripping is only effective for bytecode originally generated by expanding Claw code, but this is an acceptable limitation. 

This approach to literal values is easily extensible with new notations. I would like to explore vectors, matrices, association lists, and other formats. However, for the moment I'll focus on just the five forms indicated above: ratio, decimal, exp10, integer, literal. 

### Claw Words and Namespaces

Claw words will expand into tokens. However, a direct expansion as from `foo` to `\{%foo}` can be problematic if ever we wish to develop alternative command environments. A simple Forth-like REPL might only need a single stack, but we might also wish to model command environments having multiple stacks, a filesystems or tuple space or heap or turtle graphics canvas, inboxes and outboxes and background tasks, and so on. Claw must support terse commands in ad-hoc environments. I'm not willing to require a distinct dictionary for each use case.

So I propose a simple namespace concept. 

In namespace `bar:` the word `foo` shall expand to `\{%bar:foo}`. This will also apply to literals, e.g. number `42` should ultimately expand into bytecode `#42{%bar:integer}`. We will use a distinct namespace for each distinct command context, adding redirects or redundancy to our dictionary as needed. Pushing most of the work into the dictionary allows claw code to remain concise.

For most use cases, commands apply only to one context. Hence, our primary namespace becomes an attribute property of our editor. However, in some cases we might want to tune the namespace:

* in context A, we write a block that will apply to another context B
* given standard shell or REPL, command to reconfigure to preference

To cover these exceptional cases, I'll use a simple namespace annotation.

A namespace annotation will be indicated by the prefix character `#`, which cannot appear within words. For example, `#bar:` would indicate that the following content is in namespace `bar:`. The namespace applies until the end of the current block or command stream. A block such as `[#bar: 42 foo]` would indicate a block that internally uses namespace `bar:` regardless of the surrounding context. To simplify round-tripping, namespace annotations will also recorded as annotations in the bytecode layer, e.g. as `{&#bar:}`.

Claw supports only one namespace for any volume of code. 

There is never any ambiguity, no question which `foo` you're using. The expansion function is simple, does not depend on search or the state of the dictionary. The disadvantage is that, when deriving a new context from an old one, the new namespace won't automatically inherit words associated with the prior context. This creates a barrier that hinders development and experimentation. This concern could feasibly be mitigated with automatic refactoring tools, see *Namespace Inheritance* below.

### Claw Code as Syntactic Sugar for AO

From the prior two points on namespaces and literals, it is evident that I'm leaning towards a definition of claw code as a very simple syntactic sugar above AO code. The main weakness here is that I'll be depending on words like `integral` and `rational`, thus content not actually generated via claw interfaces is unlikely to translate into useful claw code. That said, the pseudo-literals of ABC at least aren't too difficult to read.

The syntactic sugar design meets most of my design goals. It's transparent, simple, predictable, direct. We can easily record claw REPL sessions and histories into a dictionary, e.g. as a list of blocks for future testing and refactoring. Round tripping of code is straightforward, desugaring into AO or parsing this generated AO code back into claw. Binding to a dictionary is inherited easily from AO. Claw structurally preserves the concatenative, composable, and streamable properties of ABC, i.e. because it expands directly into the AO subset of ABC. 

There is great potential to extend the set of literals with extended views of claw code. I'd be interested in introducing at least good support for sequences, towards a goal of collections oriented programming.

So, I'm feeling good about this design so far.

## Claw Shell and Effects Model

AO and Claw code are purely functional. However, claw is intended for command-line contexts. Each 'command' will be a `state → state` function that is applied to update the state of a shell. This state value may contain stacks and workspaces. Feedback to the user is achieved by rendering the state, or a partial view of it, for the user. A Forth-like REPL, for example, might render the top few values on the stack.

A command language, to be useful, must enable users to orchestrate external resources beyond the local state of the command shell. A user might update a database, query a web server, display an image to screen, control a robot. To achieve these effects, we will assume a background agent is able to observe and influence our shell state value between user commands. As a simplistic case, our background agent may integrate a mail service, and our state may include an inbox and outbox. By adding messages to our outbox, we could send messages to influence external systems. By receiving messages with our inbox, we could observe external resources to help make new command decisions.

To orchestrate multi-step behaviors on an inbox (e.g. query a database then, depending on the result, take one action or another), we would need to automate our handling of received messages. This suggests a function of a type similar to `(message*state)→state`. This function could process messages immediately, modify state, optionally update an outbox that is part of state. A function might record a subset of messages into an inbox or log for human perusal. By rendering state after updates by these asynchronous messages, rich curses-style and graphical command shells should be viable.

Effects modeled using functional updates on shared state have nice properties: 

* Updates are atomic; we can abort for any reason and restore original state.
* Priority may be modeled by aborting long-running, low priority computations.
* Non-termination is an error; termination analysis may be applied uniformly.
* Asynchronous tasks are represented in state; this can simplify debug views. 
* Effects are asynchronous; generalize easily to open or distributed systems.

On the other hand, performance may be an issue, with shell state becoming a bottleneck. Users may need to offload the more expensive computations to other machines via the effects model, such that the shell remains relatively more responsive.

### Abstract Virtual Machine (AVM) and Network Model

Messaging requires addressing. To receive a message, a shell needs an address. In general, we might want for this address to include some context information, i.e. such that we can route a received message to the correct subprogram. To send a message, a destination address is required. A fresh shell must be informed of which resources are available (or at least where to find them, e.g. via registry). 

These problems are addressed, more or less, by the [AVM](NetworkModel.md) and associated network model. The AVM behavior function has the form `(InMsg*State)→(OutMsgList*State)`. This is very similar to the `(message*state)→state` mentioned above. One motivation for using an output message list as opposed to an outbox within state is that we can easily recognize read-only queries on the state and extract additional parallelism or even replication of the machine. 

AVM input and output messages each have two parts. An input message has the form `(context*content)` where context is a value securely controlled by our AVM, and content is a value provided by the the sender. Output messages have the form `(capability*content)` where capability includes a network address and a cryptographically opaque context. To create capabilities, an AVM receives a *self* function, of type `context→capability`. This way, outgoing messages may contain capabilities to receive responses. In a type-safe environment, we might think of contexts and capabilities as indicating the type of associated message (dependent types).

Every AVM is formed of a triple: (state, behavior, signal). The signal value is a context used by the AVM host for generic life cycle purposes: init, halt, suspend, wakeup, etc.. A fresh AVM is initialized by signal with information about itself and its environment. Signals may serve other ad-hoc purposes, e.g. to indicate that an AVM should favor a power saving or low bandwidth modes.

### Command Capabilities

A claw command line will be a function of type `state→state`. This preserves nice properties for concatenation, composition, streaming. Though, the state type and effects models must also be chosen carefully to ensure that effects are also composable. To deliver a claw command, we reify it into a block, i.e. `[state→state]`, then deliver it to an AVM as a `(capability * [state→state])` message. This capability is also part of the editor's state, and routes the block to the appropriate machine. The AVM applies the function to the state and has immediate opportunity to observe and react to updated state.

Effects beyond state update are left to the discretion of the AVM and the specific model and use case. An interesting possibility is that our state value itself hosts an AVM triple for direct manipulation by the user, then the outer AVM queries the inner AVM for available messages. The nature of AVMs makes it trivial for one machine to host more machines. Together with namespaces, it is feasible to experiment with many command contexts with different state types.

### View Capabilities

Blind commands are probably bad commands. If we have the authority to update some state, we should have authority to view at least the same. But the converse isn't true: it may be useful to provide view capabilities for states we cannot directly manipulate. In the simplistic case, a view or query message might have a form similar to `(viewCap * (queryInfo * responseCap))`, where `responseCap` receives a message containing a copy of `state`. However, this is a bit too simple, and requires repeatedly polling the state even if it hasn't changed. Some properties that also would be valuable include:

* easily filter or compose views into new views
* subscribe to state and manage the subscription
* machines adapt based on active subscriptions

While I haven't hammered out the details, I think it would be wise to take a lot of inspiration from publish-subscribe models, and perhaps even integrate with some of those. In the mean time, I can probably implement editors with implicit views.

### Editor Capabilities and Asynchronous Effects and Views

In overview, I'm leaning towards a capability-secure model for commands and views, placing each REPL or Shell into an implicit AVM. The ability for commands to cause further effects is left to the discretion of the receiving AVM. View capabilities will be a bit trickier to get right, I think, though it's doable and a brute force simplistic approach should be sufficient to get started.

Usefully, these views and techniques should generalize nicely for RDP, which effectively pushes all of 'messaging' into machine adaptation to active subscriptions (with parameters).

## Secondary Design Thoughts

### Namespace Inheritance

When developing a new command context, a new REPL or shell, it would be very convenient to automatically inherit a lot of words from a similar context. Also, it would be nice if this inheritance behavior was maintained automatically over time, i.e. to include new words associated with the origin context. I don't wish to compromise the simplicity or unambiguity of Claw code. 

One viable approach leverages automatic refactoring tools and metadata. 

For namespace `b:`, we could define a word `b:namespace` that provides some ad-hoc metadata (documentation, purpose, etc.). Among this metadata, we could describe a simple wrapper functions to apply when converting words from another namespace, such as `a:`. Then, when we use an undefined word `foo`, our editor could propose a definition for `foo`, e.g. something like:

        Word 'foo' is not defined, but you may edit and install the
        suggested default definition below:
        
            [#a: foo][#b: a:wrap]

Some editors might be configured to skip the user query and define words automatically. Similarly, a linting tool might identify all the undefined words for a new namespace. Using this technique effectively pushes this sort of implementation inheritance into our tooling layers to avoid compromising the semantic layers.

### Multi-Media Claw 

Claw code can be extended with new literal types. A good structure editor could support rich manipulations of these, e.g. manipulating individual cells in a matrix or entries in an association list. A structure editor could also expand select words in place for editing, e.g. operating at the AO definition layers (orthogonally to Claw structure). Between these techniques, I think we could extend Claw code in interesting ways to interact with live coding, iPython notebooks, widgets and spreadsheets, etc..

### Late vs. Early Binding of Words

Our claw comands are bound to a dictionary. But do we expand the definitions of words at compile time? Should we wait until they're actually processed? The difference here impacts behavior when we update our dictionary. Assuming interaction with an outside world, I think early binding may be more appropriate. Late binding makes much less sense in a network context. 
